### Project Overview

- A music streaming startup, Sparkify, has grown their user base and song database and want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

- The task is to building an ETL pipeline that extracts their data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for their analytics team to continue finding insights into what songs their users are listening to. I want to be able to test the database and ETL pipeline by running queries given by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare the results with their expected results.

### Project Description

* I want to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift and execute SQL statements that create the analytics tables from these staging tables.

### Datasets

1. Song Dataset: a subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID.For example, here are file paths to two files in this dataset:
    - song_data/A/B/C/TRABCEI128F424C983.json
    - song_data/A/A/B/TRAABJL12903CDCF1A.json

2. Log Dataset: consists of log files in JSON format generated by this event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from an imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.The log files in the dataset you'll be working with are partitioned by year and month. For example, here are file paths to two files in this dataset:
    - log_data/2018/11/2018-11-12-events.json
    - log_data/2018/11/2018-11-13-events.json

### Files

1. create_table.py is where I create the fact and dimension tables for the star schema in Redshift.
2. etl.py is where I load data from S3 into staging tables on Redshift and then process that data into analytics tables on Redshift.
3. sql_queries.py is where I define the SQL statements, which will be imported into the two other files above.
4. dwh.cfg Configure Redshift cluster and data import
5. dw_test.ipynb to Create IAM role, Redshift cluster, and allow TCP connection

### Project Steps

1. Create Table Schemas
2. Design schemas for your fact and dimension tables
3. Write a SQL CREATE statement for each of these tables in sql_queries.py
4. Complete the logic in create_tables.py to connect to the database and create these tables
5. Write SQL DROP statements to drop tables in the beginning of create_tables.py if the tables already exist. This way, you can run create_tables.py whenever you want to reset your database and test your ETL pipeline.
6. Launch a redshift cluster and create an IAM role that has read access to S3.
7. Add redshift database and IAM role info to dwh.cfg.
8. Test by running create_tables.py and checking the table schemas in your redshift database. You can use Query Editor in the AWS Redshift console for this.
9. Build ETL Pipeline
10. Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from S3 to staging tables on Redshift.
11. Implement the logic in etl.py to load data from staging tables to analytics tables on Redshift.
12. Test by running etl.py after running create_tables.py and running the analytic queries on your Redshift database to compare your results with the expected results.
13. Delete your redshift cluster when finished.

### Schema

1. Fact Table
    - songplays: records in event data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong (songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent)

2. Dimension Tables

    - users: users in the app (user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level)

    - songs: songs in music database (song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration)

    - artists: artists in music database(artist_id, name, location, lattitude, longitude)

    - time: timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units(start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday)

### How to Configure and Run Scripts

1. In AWS account, create a new IAM user so that environment variables AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID and AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY could be set.
2. Set AdministratorAccess with the IAM user
3. Use variables AWS_ACCESS_KEY_ID and AWS_SECRET_ACCESS_KEY to create  S3, EC2, and Redshift
4. Choose DB/DB_PASSWORD in dhw.cfg.
5. Create IAM role, Redshift cluster, and configure TCP connectivity
6. Run  python dw_test.py
7. Fill dwh.cfg file with the outputs from dw_test.py (HOST and ARN)
8. Create tables by running  !create_tables.py
9. Run ETL pipeline by running !etl.py
10. Delete the cluster, roles and assigned permission
